Emergence and
Expansion of
Liquid Cooling in
Mainstream
Data Centers
White Paper Developed by
  ASHRAE Technical Committee 9.9, Mission Critical Facilities,
    Data Centers, Technology Spaces, and Electronic Equipment




                                                   Peachtree Corners
                                    © 2021 ASHRAE
180 Technology Parkway · Peachtree Corners, GA 30092 · www.ashrae.org · All rights reserved.




                   This white paper was developed by
ASHRAE Technical Committee (TC) 9.9, Mission Critical Facilities, Data Centers,
             Technology Spaces, and Electronic Equipment.



                                www.ashrae.org/datacenterguidance
                                   http://tc0909.ashraetcs.org




ASHRAE is a registered trademark in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, owned by the American Society of
Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc.
ASHRAE has compiled this publication with care, but ASHRAE has not investigated, and ASHRAE expressly
disclaims any duty to investigate, any product, service, process, procedure, design, or the like that may be described
herein. The appearance of any technical data or editorial material in this publication does not constitute endorsement,
warranty, or guaranty by ASHRAE of any product, service, process, procedure, design, or the like. ASHRAE does
not warrant that the information in the publication is free of errors, and ASHRAE does not necessarily agree with any
statement or opinion in this publication. The entire risk of the use of any information in this publication is assumed
by the user.
No part of this publication may be reproduced without permission in writing from ASHRAE, except by a reviewer
who may quote brief passages or reproduce illustrations in a review with appropriate credit, nor may any part of this
publication be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any way or by any means—electronic,
photocopying, recording, or other—without permission in writing from ASHRAE. Requests for permission should
be submitted at www.ashrae.org/permissions.
Contents
  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
  Objective of the White Paper. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
  Change to ASHRAE Water Classifications . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
  Motivations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
          Socket Power Increased and
          Case Temperature Reductions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
          Memory Power Increases. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
  Data Center Impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
          Impact of Increased Airflow Per Rack . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
          Impact of Specialty Servers with
          Reduced Inlet Temperature Requirements . . . . . . . . . .9
          Fan Power as a Percentage of Server Power . . . . . . .10
          Acoustical Impact of Increased Power and Airflow . . .10
          Hot Aisle Temperature and Worker Safety. . . . . . . . . .11
  Workload-Dependent Regression of Air and
     Water Inlet Conditions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
          Facility Temperatures May Need to Decrease . . . . . . .12
          Multiple Components Driving Difficulty to Cool . . . . . .13
          Decreased Hours of Economization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
  No Water to the Rack, What to Do? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
  Appendix:
     Additional Information and Other Considerations . . . .17
          Energy Effectiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
          TCO Discussion Energy Effectiveness. . . . . . . . . . . . .17



                                                                    © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
 For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
         Waste Heat Reuse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
         Pure Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
         Immersion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19
         Memory Cooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19
         Acoustics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21
         Disruptive Workload Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .23
         Data Center Infrastructure Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . .23
         Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26
 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .28




                                                                   © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Acknowledgments
                              The ASHRAE TC9.9 committee would like to thank the following people for
                          their work and willingness to share their subject matter knowledge to further the
                          understanding of liquid cooling as applied to servers deployed into data centers.
                                     • Paul Artman—Technical Director, Advanced Micro Devices, Raleigh,
                                       NC; Corresponding Member ASHRAE
                                     • Tozer Bandorawalla, PhD—Intel, Hillsboro, OR; Corresponding Member
                                       ASHRAE
                                     • David Grant, PE, CEM, DCEP—Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak
                                       Ridge, TN; Corresponding Member ASHRAE
                                     • John Gross, PE, ATD—J.M. Gross Engineering, Richmond, TX; Corre-
                                       sponding Member ASHRAE
                                     • Jason Matteson—Director of Product Strategy, Iceotope, Raleigh, NC;
                                       Corresponding Member ASHRAE
                                     • David Moss (co-lead)—Dell, Austin, TX; Corresponding Member
                                       ASHRAE
                                     • Chris E. Peterson—Technical Staff, Dell ISG, Round Rock, TX
                                     • Suresh Pichai, PE—Director, Equinix Global Engineering, Simpsonville,
                                       SC
                                     • Mani Prakash, PhD—Senior Principal Engineer, Intel, Austin, TX; Cor-
                                       responding Member ASHRAE
                                     • Matt Shumway—Technology Development, Office of the CTO, Seagate,
                                       Shakopee, MN
                                     • Mark Steinke, PhD (co-lead)— Senior Manager, Data Center GPU and
                                       Accelerated Computing Thermal Mechanical Engineering, Advanced
                                       Micro Devices, Austin, TX; Corresponding Member ASHRAE
                             A special thank you to the reviewers of this paper: Roger Schmidt, Dustin
                          Demetriou, Dave Kelley, John Groenewold, Terry Rodgers, John Bean, and
                          Gerardo Alfonso.




Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            1

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Objective of the White Paper
                              The IT industry is at a performance inflection point. When purchasing a new
                          computing device, it is expected to be more powerful than the previous genera-
                          tion. As for servers, over the last decade the industry had a period where signifi-
                          cant performance increases were delivered, generation over generation,
                          accompanied by modest and predictable power increases. That period ended
                          around 2018. Large power increases in the compute, memory, and storage subsys-
                          tems of current and future IT equipment are already challenging data centers,
                          especially those with short refresh cycles. The challenges will only increase. Liq-
                          uid cooling is becoming a requirement in some cases, and should be strongly and
                          quickly considered. This paper explains why liquid cooling should be considered,
                          rather than the details around what liquid cooling is or how to deploy it.




2                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Introduction
                               Large increases in IT equipment power will require additional equipment
                          energy use and cooling resources will result in fewer servers per rack. During the
                          1990s and early 2000s, IT equipment power draw increased regularly. At the time,
                          nameplate power was the typical planning metric, so a refresh may not have been
                          that problematic. This paper will address three time frames: the early time frame
                          where power increases were acceptable, the period following where power
                          remained relatively constant, and the current time frame where power draw is
                          again on the rise. Now that more accurate power levels are the data center plan-
                          ning metric, there is no longer a comfortable margin of power and cooling over-
                          provisioning resulting from the use of the nameplate metric.
                               Liquid-only processor chips are currently available, and more are coming in
                          the near future. There are many who wish to put off the introduction of liquid
                          cooling into the data center due to its cost and complexity. There are data center
                          impacts associated with the continued push for higher and higher levels of air
                          cooling. These impacts are likely mitigated by liquid cooling and should be a
                          point of consideration whether or not the data center is considering using liquid-
                          only chips. One of the unintended consequences of increasing chip power is the
                          need to reduce the case temperature. The case temperature, sometimes called lid
                          temperature, is the temperature on the top surface of the chip, typically at its cen-
                          ter; this is often referred to as Tcase. Chip vendors characterize the relationship of
                          the case temperature, an externally measurable location, to the critical internal
                          chip temperatures. Tcase is used during the IT equipment thermal design process
                          to ensure the chip is adequately cooled. With case temperatures decreasing in the
                          future, it will become increasingly harder to use higher ASRHAE classes of both
                          air and water. It is recommended that any future data center includes the capability
                          to add liquid cooling in the design of the data center.




Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            3

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Change to
ASHRAE Water Classifications
                               There has been some confusion over the ASHRAE water classifications. As
                          originally written, servers did not necessarily have a clearly defined compliance
                          obligation over the range of temperatures within the classifications. For simplicity,
                          the W classes are being renamed with the upper temperature limits incorporated in
                          the name. All classes will carry a lower temperature limit of 2°C (35.6°F). The
                          classes are newly named as follows: W17 (previously W1), W27 (W2), W32
                          (W3), W40 (new), W45 (W4), and W+ (W5). Server capability has been strength-
                          ened by adding the following: “operating within a particular environmental class
                          requires full performance of the equipment over the entire environmental range of
                          the specified class, based on nonfailure conditions.” This change is included in the
                          fifth edition of Thermal Guidelines for Data Processing Environments (ASHRAE
                          2021), released in 2021. In addition, the upcoming third edition of the Liquid
                          Cooling Guidelines for Datacom Equipment Centers (ASHRAE 2013) will also
                          include the update.




4                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Motivations
                              Realizing the drastic increases in device power facing the industry, the authors
                          set out to write this paper as a warning of the impending challenge. Responding to
                          the need for real-time data analytics, chip manufacturers are responding with
                          higher-frequency parts, raising thermal design power while lowering package case
                          temperature requirements. There will be an increasing number of device inventory
                          or stock keeping units (SKUs) that require liquid cooling. With multicore parts
                          reaching performance limits, the only option for increased performance is
                          increased power. Expect an increased shift from off-roadmap SKUs to on-road-
                          map SKUs in the future. Also, expect the power levels of the entire on-road SKU
                          stack power to creep upward.

Socket Power Increases and
Case Temperature Reductions
                              Higher performance demands placed upon servers can be seen in the form of
                          increasing power for the central processing units (CPUs), graphic processing units
                          (GPUs), and field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs). The increasing perfor-
                          mance demands and power trends can now be seen across all processing technolo-
                          gies. To generalize the power demand placed upon these devices, the term socket
                          power will be used to describe the power requirement for that device, whether it
                          be CPU, GPU, or FPGA. In this way, the processing technology can become inde-
                          pendent and the cooling requirements need only be related to that processor, or
                          socket.
                              To describe the cooling solution requirements, a commonly used metric called
                          thermal resistance (ca) is used to represent the effectiveness of a thermal solu-
                          tion. As a heat sink or a cold plate is used to capture heat from a device, the ther-
                          mal resistance represents the temperature difference between the processor case
                          and the cooling medium, divided by the device power, typically in °C per watt.
                          The lower the thermal resistance value, the more effective the cooling solution.
                          Figure 1 shows the thermal resistance required to cool past, current, and future
                          socket solutions from the processor manufacturers (IBM, Sun, Intel, AMD,
                          NVIDIA, ARM). Only data that has been released is included in the dataset. The
                          highest available processor power is used as the reported socket power and the
                          case or junction temperature for that processor is also used to determine the ther-
                          mal resistance. The thermal resistance, represented roughly by the dashed polyno-
                          mial trend line in the figure, represents the cooling requirement for the socket
                          itself and does not account for upstream components preheating the air prior to


Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            5

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Figure 1 Thermal resistance required to cool socket power.

                          reaching the socket. The declining trend in thermal resistance over time is clearly
                          displayed. As socket power goes up, so does the temperature difference between
                          the device and the cooling medium, whether liquid or air. As a result, improve-
                          ment in cooling performance is required, which forces a reduction in cooling inlet
                          temperature or a shift to different cooling technologies. This trend is driving a
                          shift from air to liquid cooling technologies, as liquid cooling is many times more
                          effective at removing heat than air. Hence, the thermal resistance needed to cool
                          the current higher power devices is much lower than it was 10 or 20 years ago.
                          The thermal resistance relates the socket power and maximum case temperature
                          limit to the fluid temperature whether the fluid is air or single- or two-phase
                          immersion.
                              Another way to look at the data is to express the inverse of thermal resistance,
                          or the degree of cooling difficulty. Expressed as the inverse of thermal resistance,
                          Figure 2 shows clear trends over three time periods. In the first period, 2000
                          through 2010, performance increases were enabled by increasing device power.
                          The industry was very close to needing liquid cooling at the end of this period.
                          Given the looming tipping point or need to shift to liquid cooling in or around
                          2010, chip manufacturers managed to avoid this transition through a fundamental
                          and architectural design shift. This is shown in the second time frame, the multi-
                          core period, where performance increases were enabled by increasing the number


6                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Figure 2 Degree of cooling difficulty for socket cooling, 1/ca.

                          of cores while spreading the same total power amongst more sources within the
                          chip. From around 2018 to the present, the benefits and advantages of this multi-
                          core period diminish. Devices are no longer spreading power amongst more cores.
                          Device power must increase to enable further performance increases. In addition,
                          many software workloads can use multithread processing that allows for further
                          use of socket thermal design power (TDP). Add to that, related case temperature
                          decreases only serve to steepen the slope as the denominator (temperature) trends
                          down and the numerator (wattage) trends up. This period might be thought of as
                          the “power wars,” as device vendors try to outperform their competitors.
                              Figure 3 presents the same degree of cooling difficulty as in Figure 2, but now
                          in a log scale. The exponential trends will appear linear in this view and the three
                          period trends can be more easily identified. As noted previously, only data that is
                          released and/or publicly available is represented in this figure. Any data that
                          would be deemed unreleased is used in formulating the trendline but not repre-
                          sented in the graph. The current trendline again increases at a faster rate than
                          during the first period. The trend is clear that higher socket powers with lower
                          Tcase requirements are present in the upcoming generations of processors and
                          will hasten the adoption or expansion of liquid cooling.




Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            7

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Figure 3 Degree of cooling difficulty for socket cooling, 1/ca, in log scale.



Memory Power Increases
                               The memory subsystem is rapidly emerging as a cooling challenge as well. As
                          the memory speeds increase and the number of dual in-line memory modules
                          (DIMMs) per socket increase, the cooling challenge is compounded by an
                          increase in the power density of components on the DIMM as well as an increase
                          in the total power of the memory subsystem. Depending upon the server layout, in
                          some cases where memory is upstream of processors or GPUs, the increased
                          power also causes a high degree of preheat, increasing the cooling demands
                          placed upon the processor. Liquid cooling is moving from an enhancement to a
                          requirement for high-capacity memory given the significant increase in power for
                          fifth generation double data rate memory technology (DDR5), expected to be
                          introduced in 2021, as frequency scales to meet customer workload requirements.
                          For previous memory technology transitions the memory voltage could be
                          reduced to offset frequency increases, but this is no longer possible.




8                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Data Center Impacts
                              Server manufacturers will stretch air cooling as far as possible, but that has
                          implications. To keep advancing air cooling, the server simply needs more airflow.
                          If done within the same size enclosure, that will be an increase in airflow per U,
                          which has already surpassed the ability of providing conditioned air to the cold
                          aisle in many cases. Increases in flow rate often are accompanied by increases in
                          acoustical noise emissions. This has already been noted as problematic in the
                          ASHRAE white paper “Hard Disk Drive Performance Degradation Susceptibility
                          to Acoustics” (ASHRAE 2019). Increase in raw fan power may be objectionable.
                          The server industry has done a great job reducing fan power as a percentage of
                          server power, from levels as high as 20% down to as low as 2% in some cases.
                          Continuing to use air cooling driven by these higher power components will
                          reverse this positive trend of lower fan power.

Impact of Increased Airflow Per Rack
                              First mentioned in ASHRAE Datacom Book 13, IT Equipment Design Impact
                          on Data Center Solutions (ASHRAE 2016), it was said that best-of-breed data
                          centers could deliver 1900 cfm per floor tile. There are servers on the market
                          today that require 100 cfm or more per U. If relying solely on a single tile in the
                          raised floor, that would translate into only occupying 19U within a rack. Of
                          course, there is supplemental cooling in the form of overhead or row cooling and
                          one could consider replacing or supplementing raised-floor cooling with a closely
                          coupled coil such as a rear door heat exchanger. Many data centers, however,
                          gradually depopulate IT equipment as they refresh their racks to fit within legacy
                          power or cooling levels.

Impact of Specialty Servers with
Reduced Inlet Temperature Requirements
                              Many of the 100 cfm per U servers referenced above are extremely dense,
                          resulting in temperature limitations of ASHRAE classes A1 or A2. To meet these
                          environmental temperature requirements, these products may limit the number
                          and type of components designed into the server. For example, the server might be
                          an A2 product with very few drives, without a full GPU complement, or with
                          lower power CPUs; however, when one purchases this type of server because of
                          its density capability, it can be rated to no more than 25°C or 30°C. This might
                          increase the challenge of positioning these servers and requiring them to go into a


Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            9

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
                           colder portion of the data center. As part of Thermal Guidelines for Data Process-
                           ing Environments, Fifth Edition (ASHRAE 2021), a new H1 class is created for
                           high density, air cooled IT equipment with an allowable range of 15°C to 25°C
                           (59°F to 77°F)and a recommended range of 18°C to 22°C (64.4°F to 71.6°F). To
                           be clear, the intent of the H1 class is to cover existing and future products that,
                           when modestly to fully loaded, cannot meet the ASHRAE A2 temperature range
                           and are sold today by the server original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) as
                           lower-temperature products.

Fan Power as a Percentage of Server Power
                                The IT manufacturers represented within TC9.9 have spent considerable time
                           over the last decade repeatedly saying that fan power is not 20% of a server’s
                           power. At one point, it was. Particularly when servers used constant-speed fans, it
                           was common to waste 20% of the total server power on fan power. The industry
                           evolved and began using variable-speed fans with rudimentary control, offering
                           some relief in fan power. Servers have progressed with further optimization using
                           very complex algorithms acting on feedback from many sensors that tune fans
                           individually to no more airflow than is needed. During the multicore period, fan
                           power decreased to below 2% in many cases. Responding to the steep challenge
                           seen in the “power wars” shown in Figure 3, fan power is on the rise again—expo-
                           nentially. A fan power percentage of 10% to 20% is not uncommon for some of
                           the denser servers. Interestingly, it is not always a hot chip triggering higher fan
                           speed. Quite often, the fans must speed up due to excessive preheat violating rear
                           rack air temperature design. Like the components on the circuit boards, rear-
                           mount electronics such as power supplies and active optical connectors also have
                           a maximum inlet temperature. Those trying to hold on to air cooling, putting off a
                           move to liquid, might consider total cost of ownership (TCO) implications of 10%
                           to 20% fan power inside the server. In a 50 kW rack, the fan power translates to be
                           at least 5 kW. Additionally, it is important to acknowledge server cooling fans are
                           powered by the same uninterruptible power supply (UPS) source as the server
                           itself. As such, retaining air-cooled IT equipment while server fan power
                           increases from 2% to 10% of the total server power equates to reducing the data
                           center UPS capacity by 8%.

Acoustical Impact of Increased Power and Airflow
                               Acoustical output accompanies airflow increases and thus has repercussions
                           for human interaction in addition to performance of rotational media. Data center
                           and individual product sound pressure levels already reach levels that require U.S.
                           Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) consideration for hear-
                           ing protection. Further airflow increases will only exacerbate this safety issue.
                           Rotational media continue to be affected by vibrations transmitting along chassis
                           from air movers at a magnitude that scales with about the second power of air
                           mover speed, but the acoustical impact is now dominating. As capacity of rota-
                           tional media increases, their targets for writing data are becoming smaller and are


10                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                        © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
     For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
                          thus more susceptible to both the wider frequency range of acoustic energy (i.e.,
                          up to 20 kHz that reflects multiple blade-pass harmonics) and the sound pressure
                          that scales at about the fifth power of air mover speed.

Hot Aisle Temperature and Worker Safety
                              There are multiple workplace safety standards globally that deal with heat
                          stress on workers in a given environment. Within the United States, OSHA is
                          often referenced as the authority, with research input from the National Institutes
                          of Health (NIH) and other health organizations. Most use wet-bulb globe tempera-
                          ture (WBGT) as the key metric to determine the exposure conditions, exposure
                          time, and risk of heat stress. WGBT is based on dry-bulb temperature measured
                          with a black globe thermometer Tg, natural wet-bulb temperature Tnw, wind speed,
                          solar radiance, and cloud cover. In the case of data center hot aisles, solar radia-
                          tion and cloud cover do not apply. As such, the WBGT is calculated as follows
                          (OSHA 2020):
                                                                            WBGT = 0.7 · Tnw + 0.3 · Tg

                              One byproduct of increased inlet rack temperatures and humidity is a corre-
                          sponding increase in the temperature and moisture content in the hot aisles. Typi-
                          cal work performed in the hot aisles of a data center, including but not limited to
                          cabling and component replacement, can be categorized by OSHA as Easy (com-
                          ponent replacement) or Moderate (cabling).
                              In the case of air-cooled IT equipment operating at the upper limit of the
                          ASHRAE recommended range of 27°C (80.6°F), and maximum recommended
                          dew point of 15°C (59°F) with a rack T of 15°C (27°F), there are no limitations
                          to Easy work, but Moderate work requires a 30 minute break every hour and a pre-
                          scribed minimum amount of water intake to avoid heat stress.
                              Taking the case above and moving to the upper dry bulb of the A1 allowable
                          range (32°C [89.6°F]) with a 15°C (27°F) T across the rack, and no work of any
                          kind in the hot aisles meets the safety guidelines without risk of heat stress per the
                          OSHA standard. However, localized cooling could be provided while the service
                          personnel are working in the high-temperature area.




Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            11

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Workload-Dependent
Regression of Air and Water Inlet
Conditions
                                As shown in Figure 3, there was an entire decade where server power hardly
                           grew at all. Servers could be refreshed by new versions with good performance
                           improvements and maybe slightly higher power levels due to an increase of simi-
                           lar power memory DIMMs. The industry became accustomed to a trajectory
                           where air and water inlet temperatures were continually expanding, increasing
                           opportunities for economization, heat recovery and reuse, and other similar highly
                           efficient solutions. While this is still forecast to be present in many markets, it is
                           critical to understand this trend is dependent upon IT equipment workload. There
                           are plenty of data centers who are already seeing servers produced from the
                           “power wars” period shown in Figure 3. While they had been used to only minor
                           power increases, they may be faced with accommodating a server with 25% or
                           more power and cooling requirements than the one it replaces. This much of an
                           increase is typically not easy to absorb. The next challenge may be the tempera-
                           ture set point. Those operating within a cold data center, using chillers year-round,
                           probably won’t have an issue. With data centers trying to operate more efficiently,
                           they may already be seeing issues due to their higher air set point, especially if
                           deploying the new H1 class servers mentioned in the section on Impact of Spe-
                           cialty Servers with Reduced Inlet Temperature Requirements.

Facility Temperatures May Need to Decrease
                               Hyper-dense systems that require a reduced ambient temperature supply due
                           to difficulties with chip temperatures and/or preheat issues already exist. Obtain-
                           ing a server with ASHRAE air cooling class A4 (max of 45°C [113°F]) support
                           was once fairly easy; however, many of these platforms have already slipped back
                           to only supporting the A3 or even A2 class. The hyper-dense systems may only
                           support A2 with limited configurations. As mentioned previously, ASHRAE has
                           just defined the H1 category with the suggestion that they be segregated into a
                           more controlled portion of the data center. Similarly, supported water tempera-
                           tures will soon be regressing due to increased power and lowered case tempera-
                           tures.
                               Figure 4 attempts to show a transition from air to liquid cooling based on
                           socket power. It is not exact, but some important trends should be recognized. As
                           socket power moves through 300 W toward 400 W, standard 1U and 2U servers
                           become more difficult from an air-cooled standpoint. It is likely that the data cen-
                           ter may have transitioned to a maximum of A2 temperature or lower by this point
                           but could easily be operating at W45, had it adopted liquid cooling. As chips fur-


12                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                        © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
     For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Figure 4 Air cooling versus liquid cooling, transitions, and temperatures.

                          ther increase in power, it is expected that the facility water temperature will likely
                          have to be reduced. The exact numbers are somewhat speculative. IT manufactur-
                          ers only have specific detail on one to two future generations of chips. Socket size
                          plays an important role as well. A shift to a larger package size might help to alle-
                          viate the future socket cooling demands.

Multiple Components Driving Difficulty to Cool
                              The degree of cooling difficulty metric was introduced in Figure 2. This figure
                          dealt specifically with CPU and GPU components. Once liquid cooling is consid-
                          ered, however, the entire liquid ecosystem must be taken into account. Memory,
                          for instance, can become a dominant driver in the degree of difficulty. The combi-
                          nation of CPU and memory cooling requirements, along with the preheat within a
                          common loop, will establish the ultimate limit in supportable facility water tem-
                          perature. Future designs will use combinations of serial and parallel loops within
                          the server to either minimize flow rate or to eliminate preheat. Some designs may
                          be a bit more optimal than others. It is highly likely, however, that the DLC prod-
                          ucts of today might have the ability to operate on W45 (W4). In the future, they
                          may be replaced by newer, higher-powered products only capable of W32 (W3)
                          operation, and eventually cooling requirements may drive facility water tempera-
                          tures down into the W27 (W2) range. Facilities should plan accordingly. This
                          might seem like the industry is moving backward; in terms of data center cooling
                          efficiency, it might be. At some point, the data center owners will need to decide
                          whether compute performance is more important than data center energy use. The


Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            13

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
                           ultra-high water temperatures of W45 and beyond will become increasingly diffi-
                           cult to use as the heat flux at the socket increases.
                               While this section and the previous one identify the components driving
                           designs toward liquid cooling, it is also clear that air-cooled products will still
                           exist. IT Equipment Power Trends, Third Edition (ASHRAE 2018) presents the
                           power trends of several form factors and workloads. In that book, only two prod-
                           ucts, scientific 1U-1/2 width and analytics 1U-2S, have compound annual growth
                           rates (CAGRs) of greater than 4%. One other visualization, 2U-2s, has a CAGR of
                           2.9%. All the other 21 products listed in IT Equipment Power Trends have 2% or
                           less CAGR; business processing servers show only 1% CAGR. This white paper
                           is directed at the imminent need for liquid cooling for those in the scientific, ana-
                           lytics, and visualization categories, or those that use GPUs. Categories that have
                           workloads with lesser power requirements may be progressively delayed so that
                           liquid cooling is not required for a few years. As a data center operator, this pro-
                           gression of when to retrofit or design a new data center for liquid cooling is an
                           essential consideration.

Decreased Hours of Economization
                               If the facility is built primarily to be operated in economized mode, but does
                           have chiller capability, then it is positioned to handle the future. If it has no
                           mechanical cooling, the facility should plan to add it in the future. For example,
                           see the graph in Figure 5, provided by Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL).
                               Through the approach temperature of the cooling tower and heat exchanger,
                           this graph shows the facility water temperature throughout the year as reflected by
                           the wet-bulb temperature in Tennessee where it is located. Most cold plate solu-
                           tions today can live easily on W32 water with case temperatures in the 80°C–90°C
                           range. It won’t be long before case temperature requirements drop into the low
                           70°C temperatures, especially for CPUs with high-bandwidth memory. The facil-
                           ity water temperature will need to be reduced or regressed even further to meet the
                           cooling demands for dense systems with high-power memory and CPU. A case
                           study for a dense high-performance computer (HPC) system with shadowed pro-
                           cessors and CPU in a 1U half-width configuration is described in the Appendix. It
                           is clear from Figure 6 that the combination of a 500W CPU and 12W DIMM
                           could push the facility water to W27 and start eliminating the upper end of the
                           economization graph shown in Figure 5.
                               This will impact the operating costs associated with running these types of
                           HPC or high-density systems. Additional capital will also be needed to prepare a
                           facility because of the cost of additional piping, heat exchangers, and controls
                           required to trim the W32 (W3) water down to the required inlet temperatures.
                           These cost impacts are compounded further if the facility must install new chilled-
                           water equipment to support the lower required inlet water temperatures.


14                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                        © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
     For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Figure 5 Economization example at ORNL.




Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            15

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
No Water to the Rack,
What to Do?
                                As the industry begins a more holistic shift toward liquid cooling, there may
                           be data centers where infrastructure is not in place to easily enable these solutions.
                           There may be data centers reticent to bring water close to the racks. One class of
                           data centers where this has been most prevalent is colocation facilities, where ser-
                           vice level agreements (SLAs) may be specifically written to exclude water close
                           to the racks. It’s unclear whether this is a hesitancy to bring primary water close to
                           the racks or if it is a fear to expose aqueous-based secondary fluid systems above
                           the raised floor that, if failed, might expose adjacent racks to water. If it is the lat-
                           ter, dielectric cooling could be considered. If it is the former, then clearly the facil-
                           ity is left with only computer room air conditioner/computer room air handler
                           (CRAC/CRAH) cooling; the density advantages of row or door cooling, not to
                           mention internal liquid cooling, are off the table.
                                This hesitancy for bringing water to the rack must change in the future or the
                           facility will suffer performance limitations. For an interim period, these data cen-
                           ters might get by with liquid-to-air heat exchangers, either in the rack or at the row
                           level, that provide the IT coolant while rejecting the heat back into the data center.
                           Though this is less efficient than rejecting heat directly to facility water, this can
                           provide a bridge in the interim for those that are set up with advanced air-cooled
                           solutions. In the future, facility water headers may be installed, and the liquid-to-
                           air heat exchangers can be replaced with liquid-to-liquid heat exchangers, whether
                           they be an aqueous-based coolant or a dielectric.
                                 It should be emphasized: this paper assumes that facility water temperatures
                           will decrease over time due to increasing power and lowered case temperatures.
                           Because of the substantially lower heat capacity of air, liquid/air heat exchangers
                           have much higher approach temperatures than liquid/liquid. As a result, the use of
                           liquid/air heat exchangers as an interim solution will accelerate the required
                           reduction in facility water temperatures, as well as all impacts associated with
                           such reductions.




16                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                        © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
     For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Appendix:
Additional Information and
Other Considerations
                              This section contains additional information on some of the earlier portions of
                          the paper. It also points out other considerations, including details from case stud-
                          ies of existing liquid-cooled data centers.

Energy Effectiveness
                              There is ongoing pressure to reduce the energy consumption of data centers.
                          Energy costs (kWh) vary widely throughout the world and in locations where the
                          cost is very high (such as some countries in Europe), it is hugely beneficial to
                          design data centers with maximum energy efficiency and a low power usage effec-
                          tiveness (PUE). Energy capture of waste heat to heat buildings, gardens, pools,
                          and so on; generating cold water using adsorption chillers; or contributing heat
                          back to the utility company are examples of further improving energy effective-
                          ness. Liquid cooled solutions allows a reduction of PUE to less than 1.1. Warm-
                          water cooling minimizes (or eliminates) the need for chillers, which helps energy
                          effectiveness.
                              A good example of an energy-efficient HPC data center is the Super MUC-NG
                          in the Leibniz Supercomputing Center (LRZ) at the Bavarian Academy of Science
                          and Humanities in Garching, Germany. Super MUC-NG is a cluster of 6480 thin
                          and fat nodes (Intel SkyLake Processors, Lenovo ThinkSystem SD 650) with
                          main memory of 719 TB and peak performance of 26.9 PFLOPs. The cooling is
                          direct warm-water cooling (40°C–45°C) with the waste heat used to generate cold
                          water using adsorption chillers. The chilled water is used for rack door heat
                          exchangers to capture heat from other IT equipment in the data center that does
                          not use direct water cooling. The energy efficiency (30% savings) is achieved by
                          lower server power consumption (no fans in server), reduced cooling power con-
                          sumption (warm water at 40°C), Energy-Aware Scheduling, and a need for less
                          mechanical refrigeration to cool the system. The use of warm-water cooling and
                          absorption chillers results in a partial PUE (cooling) of less than 0.07.

TCO Discussion Energy Effectiveness
                              When evaluating the cost of adding liquid cooling to data centers, owners,
                          engineers, and contractors often focus on the cost increases typically observed in
                          mechanical systems due to increased piping materials, insulation, installation
                          labor, and so on. However, a proper total installation cost analysis also factors in
                          the cost differences for the supporting systems.


Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            17

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
                               When transitioning from air-cooled to liquid-cooled IT equipment, this almost
                           always is accompanied by densification. By placing the same electrical load in
                           fewer racks, there are fewer connections. In HPC applications, higher density
                           applications use 480 V distribution to the server cabinets, eliminating low voltage
                           transformers and power distribution units (PDUs). The end result of this densifica-
                           tion is typically a reduction in the cost of the electrical installation due to reduc-
                           tions in distribution requirements.
                               The increased densification of IT equipment compute also increases the net-
                           work bandwidth requirements at the rack level. This is offset again, however, by
                           fewer racks to support the same IT equipment load. Significant decreases in phys-
                           ical network distribution and terminations, such as in the case of the electrical dis-
                           tribution and terminations, typically more than offsets the increased specification
                           of network cabling to each rack, resulting in a net reduction in installed network
                           cost.
                               Such densification can also reduce the required building footprint to support
                           the IT equipment deployment and, in particular, high-density or high-load appli-
                           cations can reduce the facility site space requirements. A proper first-cost compar-
                           ison takes all of these items into account as they are a package deal with liquid
                           cooling.
                               Recent studies on such comparisons have shown that as rack density increases,
                           the installed first cost per MW decreases due to the factors mentioned above.
                           There is a rack density point, which varies per cooling solution, at which the first
                           cost to build and deploy liquid cooling is actually lower than air-cooling the same
                           IT equipment load, making the payback period instantaneous. A comprehensive
                           evaluation of both solutions must be performed, otherwise the resultant financial
                           analysis will be incomplete.

Waste Heat Reuse
                               A unique feature of the Super MUC-NG Cluster at LRZ in Germany men-
                           tioned previously is their focus on waste heat reuse. Super MUC-NG waste heat is
                           sufficient to reheat about 40,000 m2 (430,500 ft2) of office space. LRZ also uses
                           the waste heat to drive an adsorption chiller for rear-door heat exchangers, captur-
                           ing the non-liquid-cooled heat. This eliminates the need to add a CRAC/CRAH to
                           the data center. The racks are insulated to reduce radiation to the environment
                           given the high supported water temperatures. The adsorption chiller uses a combi-
                           nation of an absorber and an evaporator to generate 600 kW of chilled-water
                           capacity, helping the drive toward better total energy efficiency.

Pure Performance
                               The HPC community is quite competitive and supercomputers are ranked reg-
                           ularly on their performance capability in PFLOPs. The highest-placed players in
                           the TOP500 HPC data centers (published twice annually) are all full or hybrid liq-
                           uid-cooled data centers. These data centers have extremely dense racks (10s to
                           100s kW) with high-power nodes using a combination of CPUs and GPUs. Full or


18                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                        © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
     For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
                          hybrid liquid cooling enables dense, high-power racks, essential to achieve the
                          performance of these data centers using a reasonable number of racks within the
                          real estate available in a typical data center.
                              Frontera, located at the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at Univer-
                          sity of Texas, Austin, is the 9th most powerful supercomputer in the world
                          (TOP500 2020) and the most powerful supercomputer on any academic campus.
                          The peak performance of Frontera is 39 PFLOPS. The primary computing system
                          for Frontera is provided by Dell EMC and powered by Intel processors, intercon-
                          nected by a Mellanox HDR and HDR-100 interconnect. The system has 8008
                          available compute nodes. The nodes have hybrid cooling with the CPUs, direct
                          liquid cooled, and rest of the system air cooled with a rear door heat exchanger
                          (RDHX) in the rack.

Immersion
                              Immersion cooling is becoming a popular option for cooling IT equipment
                          used in cryptocurrency mining/blockchain, oil and gas applications, and HPC.
                          Immersion cooling has the benefits of broad temperature support, high heat cap-
                          ture, high density, and flexible hardware and deployment options. There is a great
                          interest in immersion cooling, with a large number of startup and established play-
                          ers enabling large integrated solutions and proof of concepts in all key market seg-
                          ments.
                              Immersion cooling can create additional challenges and complexities, specifi-
                          cally with regard to deployment and service. For tank applications, a crane or two-
                          man lift is often required to remove IT equipment hardware for service. For rack-
                          based solutions, sealing the immersion fluid can be challenging. Interoperability
                          with an immersion fluid with IT equipment hardware can also be an issue that
                          may impact warranty. It is recommended that a materials compatibility assess-
                          ment and warranty impact evaluation are performed before deploying an immer-
                          sion cooling solution.
                              For these solutions, high heat dissipation devices such as GPUs and CPUs
                          require increased surface areas for heat transfer relative to a package with an inte-
                          grated heat spreader or bare die, which is generally enabled by using heat sinks
                          designed for forced air cooling. As component heat increases limits for single-
                          phase natural convection, immersion cooling limits may be exceeded requiring a
                          move to combine other cooling technologies or a wholesale shift to forced convec-
                          tion or two-phase immersion cooling altogether.

Memory Cooling
                              System-level memory has become an increasingly important focus area for
                          server cooling. Over the course of the development of double data rate synchro-
                          nous dynamic random-access memory (DDR SDRAM), the increasing power lev-
                          els have reflected the need for larger capacity and higher frequency to support
                          bandwidth. The first generation of this memory type is referred to as DDR and


Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            19

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
                           was introduced in 1998. Subsequent generations of the DDR SDRAM memory
                           are denoted using the labels DDR2, DDR3, DDR4, and DDR5.
                               There are several flavors of the DDR DIMM. For the purpose of clarity, this
                           section will focus on the registered memory DIMM, or RDIMM. The RDIMM is a
                           common version to use as server memory as it is buffered from the system mem-
                           ory controller and often provides error correction. The CPU will support memory
                           in assigned channels and can support multiple DIMMs in that assigned channel.
                           For simplicity, this section will focus on a single DIMM populated in CPU mem-
                           ory channel and referred to as one DIMM per channel (1 DPC). The 1 DPC con-
                           figuration has the DIMM reach its highest power state.
                               Investigating the 1 DPC configuration over the course of DDR generations
                           shows an interesting trend. First, the largest-capacity DIMM running the highest
                           frequency has shown a steady increase in power consumption over time. Second,
                           as the CPU performance and capability to support more memory has increased.
                           The memory subsystem rapidly increases in power. Table 1 shows the historical
                           trend in the DDR memory over four generations of memory. The power at max
                           frequency for an individual RDIMM has grown from 12 to 20 W. The CPU has
                           evolved to support four DIMM channels in the DDR2 time frame to the projected
                           twelve DIMM channels in the DDR5 time frame. The associated memory subsys-
                           tem power has grown from 48 to 240 W per CPU. That memory subsystem power
                           is now on par with the CPU power consumption.
                               One could consider this a more difficult challenge to cool relative to CPU
                           because the power is distributed in multiple devices of varying height and the
                           DIMMs must remain serviceable in the system. Furthermore DDR5, in current
                           development, will contain additional discrete devices that require cooling such as
                           the power management integrated circuit (PMIC).
                               Air cooling may be extended up to DIMM power levels of approximately
                           15 W; however, airflow balancing between the CPU heat sink and the DIMMs
                           becomes more difficult as both the DIMM and CPU power increase.
                               Liquid cooling with direct on-chip cold plates can provide cooling relief, espe-
                           cially if the cold plates are placed on both sides of each DIMM card. While two-
                           sided cooling can be expected to cool upwards of 20 W per DIMM, the design,
                           manufacture, and servicing is more complex. A case study with one-sided DIMM

Table 1               Memory Generations Power at Highest Capacity
                                                                                                                                         Total Memory
 Memory                                Highest                         Power at Max                            1 DPC                     Subsystem per
 Generation                            Capacity                        Frequency                               Count                     Socket
           DDR2                               16 GB                                 12 W                                 4                              48 W
           DDR3                               32 GB                                 16 W                                 4                              65 W
           DDR4                              128 GB                                 17 W                                 8                             144 W
           DDR5                              256 GB                                 20 W                               12                              240 W




20                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                        © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
     For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Table 2              Cold-Plate Water Cooling System Configuration Assumptions
Component                                                    Details
Coolant distribution unit (CDU)                                      Commercial off-the-shelf nominally sized for 750 kW
    Number of racks per CDU                                                                                            8
                                                                  40U for liquid cooled blades + 2U top-of rack (TOR) air-
                 Rack height
                                                                                       cooled switch
        Liquid-cooled blades                                                       2U consisting of 4 half-width 1U nodes
                   1U nodes                                                              2 CPUs with 8 DIMMs per CPU
                CPU cooling                                                                      Direct on-chip cold plate
              DIMM cooling                                                              One-sided cooling with cold plate


                          cooling in a dense 1U half-width node with two CPU in series is shown in
                          Figure 6. The design configuration used for this case study is described in Table 2.
                              The ASHRAE water cooling class W27 can support up to 500 W for each
                          CPU and up to 12 W per DIMM with single-sided DIMM cooling. On the other
                          hand, ASHRAE water cooling class W45 reduces the cooling capability to a point
                          that it may be comparable to a conventional air-cooled system with a low cold
                          aisle temperature for this dense 1U half-width shadowed configuration. Several
                          underlying design choices modulate the cooling capability shown in Figure 6. For
                          example, a more capable pump and heat exchanger in the CDU, fewer blades per
                          rack, fewer racks per CDU and/or a double-sided memory cooler would contribute
                          to greater cooling capability. This exercise is simply intended to show that careful
                          analysis is necessary to architect the cold plate-based water-cooling system.
                          Another option with direct on-chip cold plates is to cool the CPU with liquid
                          while the memory subsystem is cooled by air. This hybrid approach also has its
                          downsides. System fan power remains high, especially because the CPU cold
                          plates contribute to airflow impedance, the heat capture to liquid is decreased, and
                          therefore the overall TCO benefit of liquid cooling is eroded.
                              Single and two-phase immersion may provide sufficient cooling for high-
                          power DIMMs while not introducing the serviceability challenges with direct on-
                          chip cold plate cooling.

Acoustics
                              Increase in air movers speeds used to cool IT equipment has significant air-
                          borne noise impacts to human health and annoyance and also to hard disk drive
                          performance degradation. Some respective references are ECMA-74 (ECMA
                          2019) and a previous ASHRAE white paper (ASHRAE 2019). Empirical observa-
                          tions documented in literature show that sound pressure amplitudes from air mov-


Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            21

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Figure 6 Reduction of cooling capability with cold-plate-based liquid
         cooling of CPU and memory.


                           ers increase with ~5th power of their operating speeds and vibration with ~2nd
                           power.
                               Beyond the annoyance from such characteristics as blade-pass harmonics,
                           maximum time-weighted average A-weighted sound pressure level thresholds per
                           exposure time for hearing protection have existed for many years, for example by
                           the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH 1998). This
                           document states that exposure beyond an 8-hour time-weighted average at or
                           above 85 dBA is considered hazardous. Or, per Table 1-1 in this document, “no
                           worker exposure shall equal or exceed 90 dBA for 2.5 hours, 100 dBA for 15 min-
                           utes, 110 dBA for 1.5 minutes,” and so on. That is to say, the allowable exposure
                           time dramatically decreases with the experienced A-weighted sound pressure
                           level.
                               Ambient A-weighted sound pressure levels of data centers regularly meet or
                           exceed 80 dBA. In fact, such an A-weighted sound pressure level may be recorded
                           at a standing position 1 m (3.3 ft) from a single server. If we assume a 30%


22                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                        © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
     For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
                          increase in air mover speed, then an increase of 6 dB is expected. With a 50%
                          increase in air mover speed comes a 9 dB increase. Clearly, the conflict with
                          safety exposure thresholds becomes more stark and greater precautions must be
                          taken.
                              Sensitivity of hard disk drives is increasing with their storage capacity. In a
                          general sense, because hard disk drive heads must target ever-smaller locations on
                          the platters, the same amount of disturbance can more easily move the head off
                          track and disturb write operations. Although vibration transmission has been the
                          historical concern and remains a risk, disturbance from acoustic energy in the
                          range of 1 to 20kHz has become the dominant mechanism over the past decade.
                              Unweighted overall sound pressure levels at the hard disk drives in servers
                          regularly reach 100 dB and higher. Each hard disk drive model has its own nonlin-
                          ear response to frequency content of the disturbances, but in a very general sense,
                          unweighted overall sound pressure level at the hard disk drive in excess of 110 dB
                          may substantially degrade throughput performance. Similar to the argument for
                          human perception of airborne noise, increases of 30% to 50% in air mover speed
                          result in jumps of 6 to 9 dB sound pressure level and thus higher hard disk drive
                          throughput performance risk.

Disruptive Workload Types
                              There has been a paradigm shift regarding workload types and their associated
                          market segments. This shift is driven by insatiable demand for more data, the need
                          for real-time data consumption, and real-time analytics. High-performance analyt-
                          ics and artificial intelligence (AI) are crossing market segments from pure HPC
                          play to more central, edge, cloud, HPC in cloud, and colocation data center solu-
                          tions.
                              Enterprises embracing AI applications for enhancing market data analyses,
                          predictive model building, and so on are primary customers of colocation data
                          centers. Machine learning and AI functions optimize demand-side advertising
                          platforms. Online gaming introduces intensive time-of-day loading based on
                          gamer behavior; gaming uses typically involve nonvirtualized GPU-based server
                          allocations to enhance user experience. Aircraft manufacturers, global industrial
                          machinery conglomerates, and others are increasing their use of HPC systems
                          with the latest processor designs. Emerging autonomous-vehicle-focused applica-
                          tions also use AI capabilities, and will do so increasingly at the edge. All of these
                          put a strain on data center cooling systems. Almost all these applications demand
                          dense compute/memory/networking clusters enabling low-latency fabric, pushing
                          the limits of air-based cooling, but more easily accommodated by liquid cooling.

Data Center Infrastructure Limitations
                              The critical path to support a specific IT equipment mission for any data cen-
                          ter will rely on its ability to cater to that mission’s power, space, or cooling needs.
                          A recent article on ComputerWeekly.com titled “Datacentre liquid cooling: What
                          needs to happen for it to become commonplace in colocation?” also describes


Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            23

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
                           these challenges (Donnelly 2020). A balance must be found between the space
                           utilization for the IT equipment and the supporting infrastructure such as switch-
                           boards, PDUs, CRACs/CRAHs, and CDUs. Some older data centers shifting to
                           denser racks may find themselves with more empty space than a casual observer
                           may expect simply due to floor loading limitations. Design variation within the
                           world’s stock of data centers is high, but this section attempts to describe common
                           hurdles that one may encounter when pursuing liquid cooling in an existing data
                           center for the first time.
Power
                               If a liquid cooling solution is needed at a rack, the physics of heat removal
                           necessitate it. Once a liquid-cooled system is introduced, data centers that may
                           have previously been limited by the facility’s ability to deliver sufficient air cool-
                           ing may now have the opportunity for significant rack density increases. One can-
                           not ignore comparable compliments of power delivery that might come in the
                           future. Given a new liquid-cooled mission, the quantity and size of existing cir-
                           cuits may suffice for smaller systems. As systems grow, there is an inflection
                           point at which increasing the circuit voltages from 208 to 480 V makes sense
                           given the smaller conductor sizes, circuit and in-rack PDU quantity, and opera-
                           tional costs associated with voltage losses when distributing lower voltages.
                               Arch flash modeling and fuse and circuit breaker coordination must be consid-
                           ered in any system, but are even more important as large electrical distribution
                           gear gets closer and closer to the electrical power’s point of use.
                               Whether electrical power is overhead or underfloor, space coordination must
                           identify conflicts between other electrical circuits, electrical power trays, network
                           cable trays, cooling infrastructure, fire protection systems, and anything else that
                           could compromise the performance, accessibility, or maintainability of any sys-
                           tem.
Space
                               Data center whitespace must be able to accommodate the dimensional aspects
                           of the racks being cooled as well as their associated weights. Rack aisle pitches
                           may need to accommodate additional spacing for RDHXs. For rack densities that
                           are challenged in getting adequate airflow from a raised-floor system, designers
                           must understand the aisle space requirements to know if the number of available
                           floor tiles would actually provide enough airflow from the raised floor or not. Air
                           flow consumption of high rack powers should be carefully analyzed. Air flows of
                           a 40 to 50 kW rack could be up to 5000 cfm. Floor tile best-in-class is 1900 cfm.
                               For large system installations, the orientation and spacing of rows (or pitch)
                           must be analyzed and coordinated with existing obstructions such as other rows of
                           cabinets, columns, and electrical and cooling equipment and the area they require
                           by code and for maintenance activities. In looking at a metric of cooling capacity
                           per unit area taken by the cooling equipment, one can determine some value of
                           conserving more space for IT equipment.
                              Load paths for heavy racks must have the appropriate rating for rolling loads.
                           This could include elevators, ramps, thresholds, corridors, and so on.


24                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                        © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
     For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
Cooling
                               Small-scale liquid cooling can be accomplished in a straightforward manner.
                          A one-rack system can use internal to the rack liquid-to-air heat exchangers if
                          facility cooling water is not available. Even at a small scale, a fully populated liq-
                          uid-cooled rack could generate significant heat into the data center. Best practice
                          air management must still be used to prevent hot spots. These high-density racks
                          can quickly use any remaining capacity of existing air handlers. Or, if facility
                          cooling water is available, a rack-mounted cooling distribution unit can be used. If
                          needed, these units can be installed in a neighboring rack or under a raised floor if
                          space is available.
                               Large-scale liquid cooling involves bringing more piping deeper into the data
                          center. If done overhead, piping should be kept above aisles and branch piping
                          should be sized to serve rows on either side. With piping connections passing over
                          critical or costly equipment, drip pans with leak detection and piped drains routed
                          to the floor should be installed. Coordination between power, cooling, and net-
                          work routing is of the utmost importance.
Efficiency Expectations
                              To take advantage of the efficiency benefit enabled by liquid cooling, one
                          must translate the elevated fluid temperatures released from the data center to the
                          heat rejection equipment designed for low kW/ton efficiencies. This largely
                          means eliminating mechanical cooling equipment such as chillers. Existing large-
                          scale data centers expecting significant future adoption of liquid cooling with
                          extensive low-temperature chilled-water distribution piping could consider con-
                          verting the existing piping over to warm water and then installing economization
                          equipment at the centralized level. Then smaller diameter piping could be
                          installed to continue providing chilled water to those loads that require it.
Water Quality and Maintenance
                              Water quality and ongoing maintenance is an issue of great concern to many
                          facilities. A closed system’s long-term success often is determined in the design
                          and installation phase. During design, a wetted materials list should be created
                          and subsequently maintained to identify that all materials that come in contact
                          with the liquid are, in fact, approved. Materials with properties that inherently
                          keep the closed system clean should be considered. Installers should abide by
                          clean construction techniques. A clean and flush plan should be considered during
                          design to incorporate features that will enable an effective clean and flush.
Controls
                              Additional power use by IT equipment can cause problems with cooling sys-
                          tem controls and equipment stability. If elevated temperatures are used, any head-
                          room for temperature or flow excursions becomes limited. IT equipment OEMs
                          outline the temperature and flow magnitude, duration, and rate of change enve-
                          lopes in which stable operation can be performed. Matching the cooling exactly
                          with the heat load results in perfectly consistent supply temperatures. Temperature
                          fluctuations in the supply water from facilities can occur if the cooling load is
                          erratic, there is low cooling load diversity on the system, large equipment is staged


Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            25

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
                           ON/OFF, control system tuning is off, or there is a mismatch between the cooling
                           load and the cooling being provided.

Nomenclature
                           CAGR                = Compound annual growth rate
                           CDU                 = Coolant distribution unit
                           CRAC                = Computer room air conditioner
                           CRAH                = Computer room air handler
                           CPU                 = Central processing unit
                           CTW                 = Cooling tower water
                           DDR                 = Double data rate. A type of memory; a number behind
                                                 DDR indicates the generation
                           DIMM                = Dual in-line memory module
                           DPC                 = DIMMs per channel
                           FPGA                = field programmable gate array
                           FWS                 = Facility water system
                           HPC                 = High-performance computer; also called a supercom-
                                                 puter
                           GPU                 = Graphic processing unit
                           NIH                 = National Institutes of Health
                           NIOSH               = National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
                           OEM                 = original equipment manufacturer
                           ON/OFF roadmap      = Silicon vendors have a list of CPU SKUs that are adver-
                                                 tised that are considered on roadmap and generally
                                                 available to the public; there also can be off roadmap
                                                 SKUs that can be made available upon request by the
                                                 customer and/or server vendor
                           OSHA                = Occupational Safety and Health Administration
                           PFLOPs              = petaFLOPS. A measure of computer performance equal
                                                 to 1015 floating point operations per second
                           PUE and partial PUE = Power usage effectiveness. A metric used to describe
                                                 facility efficiency defined simply as the energy entering
                                                 the facility divided by the energy used by the IT equip-
                                                 ment. A facility with equal amounts of overhead and IT
                                                 energy would have a PUE of 2.0 because only half of the
                                                 energy is used to power the IT equipment. Overhead can
                                                 be attributed to many things such as cooling, power con-
                                                 version, lighting, office equipment not performing the
                                                 functions of the IT equipment, etc. A partial PUE would
                                                 an example of a breakdown of the overhead into a spe-
                                                 cific function such as the cooling partial PUE consisting
                                                 of all energy associated with the cooling function.


26                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                        © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
     For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
                          RDIMM                                     = Registered memory DIMM
                          SDRAM                                     = Synchronous dynamic random-access memory
                          SKU                                       = Stock keeping unit. Units within the same family of pro-
                                                                      cessors with differing attributes such as frequency, num-
                                                                      ber of cores, wattage, and case temperature limits
                          SLA                                       = Service level agreements
                          TCO                                       = Total cost of ownership
                          TDP                                       = Thermal design power. The maximum amount of heat
                                                                      generated by a component
                          TOR                                       = Top of rack (network switch product)
                          UPS                                       = Uninterruptible power supply
                          WGBT                                      = Wet-bulb globe temperature. A measure of the heat
                                                                      stress in direct sunlight, which takes into account tem-
                                                                      perature, humidity, wind speed, sun angle, and cloud
                                                                      cover (solar radiation)




Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers                                                                                                            27

                                                                       © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
    For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
References
                           ASHRAE. 2013. Liquid cooling guidelines for datacom equipment centers, sec-
                              ond ed. Peachtree Corners, GA: ASHRAE.
                           ASHRAE. 2016. IT Equipment Design Impact on Data Center Solutions.
                              Peachtree Corners, GA: ASHRAE.
                           ASHRAE. 2018. IT Equipment Power Trends, Third Edition. Peachtree Corners:
                              ASHRAE.
                           ASHRAE. 2019. “Hard Disk Drive Performance Degradation Susceptibility to
                              Acoustics.” Whitepaper. Peachtree Corners, GA: ASHRAE. https://
                              www.ashrae.org/file%20library/technical%20resources/bookstore/hard-disk
                              -drive-performance-degradation-susceptibility-to-acoustics.pdf.
                           ASHRAE. 2021. Thermal guidelines for data processing environments, fifth ed.
                              Peachtree Corners, GA: ASHRAE.
                           Donnelly, C. 2020. Datacentre liquid cooling: What needs to happen for it to
                              become commonplace in colocation? ComputerWeekly.com. https://
                              www.computerweekly.com/feature/Datacentre-liquid-cooling-What-needs-to
                              -happen-for-it-to-become-commonplace-in-colocation.
                           ECMA. 2019. EMCA-74, Measurement of Airborne Noise Emitted by Informa-
                              tion Technology and Telecommunications Equipment, 17th Edition. Geneva,
                              Switzerland: European Computer Manufacturers Association International.
                           NIOSH. 1998. Occupational noise exposure. Washington, D.C.: United States
                              Department of Health and Human Services.
                           OSHA. 2020. OSHA Technical Manual TED 1-0.15A. Washington, D.C.: United
                              States Department of Labor.
                           TOP500. 2020. TOP500 LIST-NOVEMBER 2020. Sinsheim, Germany: Prome-
                              teus GmbH. https://www.top500.org/lists/top500/list/2020/11/.




28                                                                Emergence and Expansion of Liquid Cooling in Mainstream Data Centers

                                                                        © 2021 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org).
     For personal use only. Additional reproduction, distribution, or transmission in either print or digital form is not permitted without ASHRAE's prior written permission.
